---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "E-Commerce Platforms"
date: 20254-09-1
published: true
labels:
  - Research
  - E-Commerce
---

  *The Ever Evolving E-Commerce Platform*

	The rise of e-commerce platforms has transformed the way we shop, offering convenience and accessibility. This body of work explores the evolution of e-commerce, from its early days with Michael Aldrich's "Teleshopping" system to the global giants like Amazon and eBay. The internet's development, beginning with ARPANET, played a crucial role in shaping e-commerce. Technological advancements like voice commerce and live-stream commerce have further enhanced the shopping experience. Additionally, the importance of website design and user trust, influenced by online ratings and reviews, is discussed. With the accessibility to purchase just about anything without leaving the comfort of your home, many options are placed in front of the everyday consumer to shop for countless amounts of things. There are millions of websites that can supply the consumer with this ease, that's why they exist and continue to thrive in today's world. Amazon describes this same process as “the trading of goods and services online” and that is as simple as it gets. The future of e-commerce promises continued innovation and growth. These e-commerce alcoves have shown unparalleled growth over the past years. Statistics states, six out of ten shopping journeys start online (A. 2024). We’ll dive into the makings of these favorable websites one page at a time. 
E-commerce transactions can be traced back to the early stages of the internet. In 1979, entrepreneur Michael Aldrich connected a modified domestic television to a real-time multi-user transaction processing computer via a telephone line (Miva, 2020). Michael Aldrich marked a significant milestone in the early days of e-commerce. It enabled businesses to connect and conduct transactions online, opening up a new stream of income and transforming the way wholesalers and retailers interacted. This innovation laid the foundation for the future growth and development of e-commerce platforms. This system, coined "Teleshopping," was marketed in 1980 as a business-to-business system and sold in the UK, Ireland, and Spain. Soon after, the Boston Computer Exchange assembled the first e-commerce company, an online marketplace for used computers. The mid 1990s saw the emergence of e-commerce giants like Amazon and eBay, creating a new market for online businesses. 1992 marked the launch of Books.com, the first e-commerce marketplace (Kazinik, 2024). The American National Standard Institute (ANSI), originating in 1979, set standards for the development and distribution of products and systems in the US and internationally. These standards ensure consistency, shared definitions, and standardized testing (Wikipedia, 2020). The internet's development began in the late 1960s with the creation of ARPANET, funded by the U.S. Department of Defense, enabling communication between multiple computers on a single network (McLean, 2022). This laid the foundation for the web as we know it today, with its official birthday on January 1st, 1983, and public availability on April 30, 1993. Technology has been the backbone of the growth of e-commerce platforms.  
The evolution of e-commerce websites, in terms of their interaction with users, has been remarkable. From the early days of Jane Snowball ordering groceries through her television using Michael Aldrich's system in the 1990s, to the emergence of platforms like eBay in 1995, e-commerce has consistently strived to bring the store to the consumer (Marfice,2024). This has been made possible through advancements in technology, spanning from product discovery to the final checkout. The goal was to create a seamless and enjoyable shopping experience for both businesses and customers, and the industry has made significant strides in achieving this. In 2024 alone, leading technologies such as voice commerce, also known as v-commerce, a growing e-commerce technology trend that leverages voice assistants and smart devices to enable customers to make purchases using voice commands. As well as live-stream commerce which is a growing trend in e-commerce where businesses utilize live-streaming platforms to showcase and sell products in real-time (Hanak,2024). Diverse payment options have also further transformed the e-commerce landscape, payment and collection options play such a crucial role in enhancing the convenience and flexibility of the ecommerce experience. With time the functionality of these websites have evolved due to the rising popularity and growth this market created. With the end goal to simplify the consumer's shopping experience. Some of the leading technologies mentioned above made it easier for the shopper to buy goods and services but what about the design aspect of the website itself?
	The visual appeal of an e-commerce website not only fosters trust between consumers and retailers but also significantly influences purchasing decisions. Online ratings and reviews play a crucial role in shaping consumer perceptions as well. According to the Pew Research Center, 51% of Americans trust online reviews and 46% feel reviews help them feel confident about their purchases (BOP.com).  Additionally, the design of a website is a key factor in establishing brand credibility, and first impressions are formed within seconds. The leading ecommerce websites today all have these key factors in common, visual appeal, user friendly interface, mobile responsiveness, fast loading speeds and trust signals. For example, Target provides a comprehensive user experience with seamless page navigation, a fast and effective search bar, and a secure checkout process. Similarly, Patagonia effectively utilizes visually striking imagery to capture attention and forge emotional connections with customers. Touching more on that visual appeal with their slider on the website screen showcasing new products, promoting seasonal and popular items and announcing a charitable project they are working on. All images in the slider are big, bold and eye-catching, helping to pique the customer’s interest and create that emotional connection mentioned (Reed, 2024). While Incase provides detailed product visuals from various angles, including customer-submitted photos, to enhance the shopping experience. They include images of the front, back, sides and inside of their bags and cases. Which highlights different angles or shows products in real-world situations (Reed, 2024). Ultimately, prioritizing usability and design is essential for creating a successful ecommerce website.
	Tracing the evolution of ecommerce, Amazon emerges as a pioneering force, showcasing remarkable growth and innovation since its inception. In 1995, Jeff Bezos launched Amazon, an online marketplace for books that quickly became one of the top-selling e-commerce websites today. When you break down how we got here with our items being delivered just a click away we must give credit. Bezos, a former Wall Street executive, recognized the potential of the internet and revolutionized online shopping.  Amazon sold over five billion items last year alone and hosts over a hundred million items. Initially Amazon started with five main categories; compact disks, computer hardware, computer software, videos, and books but later it was decided it's more cost efficient to sell books. In the first two months Amazon sold books to over 45 countries and made over eighty thousand dollars a month. While the primary focus here isn't on finances, the widespread demand for online shopping across the nation underscores the desire for convenient and effortless purchasing options. Amazon developed into the biggest ecommerce website to ever be. In 1998, Amazon expanded its product offerings to encompass a wide range of goods, earning the nickname "the everything store." With tech also booming around this time consumers and investors were pouring into Amazon and growing this online store into what we know today. The company's expansion into various product categories introduced innovative services like Amazon Prime's two-day shipping which has solidified its position as a leader in the industry. Bezos continued to expand Amazon's reach, adding diverse product lines like groceries and healthcare, and even venturing into unconventional areas like tiny homes, to further enhance customer convenience and attract new markets. With technology continuously advancing and consumer preferences shifting towards online shopping, the e-commerce landscape will likely continue to evolve, offering even greater convenience and accessibility in the years to come.
	Emerging around the same time as Amazon was eBay, a trailblazer in the e-commerce sector. Ebay, first named AutionWeb, was created by a computer programmer Pierre Omidayer, in 1995 he made a website with the idea of simply selling and buying items online. Around this time buying and selling items was still relatively new. What makes eBay particularly interesting is how, in its earliest incarnation, it anticipated many of the key features that would later define the phenomenon commonly known as the “platform”. Ebay wasn’t just a place where collectors waged late-night bidding wars over rare Beanie Babies. In retrospect, it also turned out to be a critical hinge in the history of the internet. Omidyar’s site pioneered the basic elements that would later enable Google, Facebook and the other tech giants to unlock the profit potential of the internet by “platformising” it (Tarnoff, 2022). Omidayer was quoted saying “I wanted to do something different,”, “to give the individual the power to be a producer as well as a consumer.”(Tarnoff, 2022). This was the motivation for the website. This “platform” mentioned created another market for a different kind of ecommerce website that shifted power to the buyer. Although eBay ran into issues with disputes between buyers and sellers, Omidyar was frequently called upon to adjudicate. He didn’t want to have to play referee, so he came up with a way to help users work it out themselves: a forum. People would leave feedback on one another, creating a kind of scoring system. Giving praise where it's due and making complaints where it's needed. This gave buyers more information about the sellers they were considering doing business with, and it also gave them a way to hold sellers accountable for their actions. This increased transparency and accountability and helped to create a more level playing field between buyers and sellers, and it ultimately gave buyers more power in the marketplace. The value of eBay would rely on the contributions of its users. The more they contributed, the more useful the site would be. The market would be a community, a place made by its members. They would become both consumers and producers. The innovation this website created is the reason why ebay is still around and one of the leading ecommerce websites today. 
	As previously discussed, the key factors contributing to eBay and Amazon's success include its innovative approach, user-driven feedback system, and vast selection of goods and services. These elements form the foundation of any thriving e-commerce platform today, with customer feedback being paramount. The influence of customer ratings and reviews is undeniable,  increased sales are the main reason why customer ratings and reviews are important to brands with DTC ecommerce channels (Direct to Customers: when a brand or manufacturer sells its own products to its end customers). Research shows consumers are more willing to purchase products from brands that post positive and negative reviews. Product reviews can encourage shoppers to purchase a product they may have been on the fence about. According to research, the purchase likelihood for a product with just five reviews is 270% greater than a product with no reviews (esw.com). Reviews help consumers determine whether a product's quality and specifications will meet their expectations. Additionally, reviews provide insights into the actual product experience, helping to minimize returns by ensuring that the received product aligns with the customer's anticipations. Customer testimonies to their favorite products also creates free marketing for the products and the websites they are sold on, whether positive or negative, customer reviews signify a vested interest in a brand and its products. This active engagement extends brand exposure far beyond traditional marketing campaigns. This form of micro-marketing, driven by authentic customer experiences, continues to work long after a review is posted, offering sustained brand awareness and substantial short- and long-term marketing benefits. Leading e-commerce platforms are continually evolving and enhancing their websites to seamlessly integrate into the lives of everyday consumers. 
	As the trend of online shopping continues to rise, businesses must adapt to stay competitive. Investing in the development and marketing of a robust online store can offer a significant advantage, potentially yielding greater returns than traditional in person store fronts. Let's talk numbers, 20.1% of retail purchases are expected to take place online in 2024 (Snyder, 2024). Online shopping statistics show the increase in digital orders is not just a trend. Shopping online is here to stay, as 22.6% of total retail sales will be conducted online in 2027 (Snyder, 2024). To avoid becoming obsolete, businesses must start thinking today about how to sell products online. The e-commerce market is booming, with projections indicating a staggering worth of over $7.9 trillion by 2027 (Snyder, 2024). This presents a golden opportunity for businesses to establish a strong online presence and capitalize on the immense potential of e-commerce. The consumer electronics market is a global powerhouse, generating a staggering $837.2 billion in revenue worldwide in 2023. In the U.S. alone, online sales of electronics reached a substantial $131.4 billion, highlighting the immense popularity and demand for these products. With a remarkable global annual growth rate of 14.6%, the consumer electronics industry is poised for further expansion, with revenue projected to reach a remarkable $1.3 trillion by 2027 (A, 2024). This growth trajectory highlights the crucial role of e-commerce platforms in propelling the expansion of this flourishing market. Forecasts suggest that online sales will account for nearly a quarter of global retail sales by 2027 (A, 2024).
	The rapid growth of e-commerce can be attributed in part to the influence of the World Wide Web, particularly social media platforms. With the rise of influencers as trendsetters, consumers are easily swayed by their recommendations, making social media a powerful tool for driving e-commerce sales. The relationship between social media and e-commerce websites is a powerful marketing alliance. Influencers, as real-life brand advocates, drive sales and popularity, replacing traditional word-of-mouth marketing. Brands themselves also cultivate a strong online presence, fostering a connection with consumers who follow their pages for updates and eagerly anticipate new releases. This dynamic interaction transforms websites into virtual friends, keeping consumers informed and engaged, ultimately driving purchasing decisions. Brands can directly interact with customers, providing detailed product information and fostering trust, ultimately ensuring customer satisfaction. Popular social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and Snapchat are invaluable tools for boosting website sales.  By effectively incorporating social media marketing strategies, businesses can connect with a growing generation of consumers, ensuring long-term brand visibility and success. Social media offers a uniquely informal yet targeted way to assess and connect with your audience. As demonstrated by the e-commerce giants discussed earlier, a strategic pivot to social media can significantly boost sales and foster lasting brand loyalty. This is achieved through compelling, shareable content that resonates with your audience, encouraging them to explore your website further. Additionally, social media provides a platform for building community and giving back to customers through contests and giveaways, further driving engagement and attracting new followers who can be converted into loyal customers. This ultimately cultivates a community of consumers who trust your brand and keep coming back. The immense reach of social media empowers brands to cultivate a distinct identity and produce a sense of relatability, with a personalized approach being key. However, the challenge for ecommerce websites lies in adapting to the ever-evolving landscape of technological innovations and generational shifts.
	As the internet matures and consumers become increasingly discerning, the role of customer feedback in shaping e-commerce websites is more crucial than ever. Brands must actively listen to and analyze customer reviews, using them as a valuable tool for ongoing website improvement and ensuring sustained relevance and sales growth. For ecommerce websites to stay ahead of technological advancements and cater to diverse generations they must embrace technological innovations.  E-commerce platforms should proactively adopt emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, augmented reality, and virtual reality to enhance the shopping experience and meet evolving customer expectations. As well as utilizing customer data from reviews and social media to personalize product recommendations, marketing campaigns, and website content, catering to individual preferences and generational nuances. The best thing to prioritize is the user experience by designing intuitive, easy-to-navigate websites that cater to the needs of different age groups. Ensuring that your website is accessible to users with disabilities and considers the diverse needs of different generations, such as offering multiple payment options and providing clear instructions. By implementing these strategies, e-commerce websites can successfully navigate the challenges of technological advancements and generational shifts, ensuring long-term growth and relevance in the ever-evolving digital landscape.	
	In the rapidly expanding and evolving e-commerce landscape, businesses are seeking external support and forging cross-industry collaborations to stay competitive. This growth has also fueled job creation, opening up a wide array of opportunities in the e-commerce space. The need for skilled professionals in web development, software engineering, data analysis, and cybersecurity has surged to build and maintain e-commerce platforms. E-commerce currently represents 10% of all retail sales, and this figure is expected to grow by 15% annually. The increasing demand for e-commerce solutions will create more career opportunities in the field. The pandemic-driven shift to online shopping has further amplified this demand, benefiting a wide range of individuals. The e-commerce industry also presents opportunities for social media influencers and content creators. Content marketing, in particular, plays a crucial role in e-commerce sales, with a 2019 survey revealing that 70% of consumers prefer learning about products through content rather than traditional advertising (Shaw, 2020). The industry's continued growth fuels job creation and entrepreneurship, enabling individuals to establish and manage their own e-commerce ventures. 
	In conclusion, the e-commerce landscape has experienced remarkable growth and evolution, driven by technological advancements and shifting consumer behaviors. From its early days with pioneering systems like Michael Aldrich's "Teleshopping" to the dominance of giants like Amazon and eBay, e-commerce has revolutionized the way we shop. The internet's development, particularly the advent of the World Wide Web, has been instrumental in shaping this industry. Technological innovations such as voice commerce and live-stream commerce have further enhanced the shopping experience, making it more convenient and engaging for consumers. Moreover, the importance of website design and user trust, influenced by online ratings and reviews, cannot be overstated. As e-commerce continues to grow, businesses must adapt by investing in robust online platforms and leveraging social media to connect with consumers. The future of e-commerce promises continued innovation and growth, offering exciting opportunities for businesses and consumers alike. The future of ecommerce looks to be just as exciting as its past.	
